Update migration mark down with note (#33789)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/porting/cpp-cli-alts.md

---
title: Migrating C++/CLI projects to ISO C++ and/or .NET
description: Learn about alternatives to C++/CLI
author: AaronRobinsonMSFT
ms.date: 01/30/2023
---

# Migration from C++/CLI to ISO C++ and/or C\#

> The C++/CLI language has been around since 2005 and has enabled users to easily integrate C++ and a .NET language into a single binary. The utility of C++/CLI remains as an innovative way to integrate C++ with the .NET runtime on the Windows platform. There are however limitations to using C++/CLI and as ISO C++ and .NET platforms evolve these limitations are expected to grow.

Reviewer: > easily

We typically try to avoid this word since it is very subjective. Also, we don't want to oversell something that might not be the best forward-looking choice.

**Current Limitations**

> - Only operates on the Windows platform.

Reviewer: There usually isn't a blank line between markdown bullets.

- Limited functional support for the latest ISO C++.

- Limited support for newer .NET types and patterns (for example, [`Span<T>`](/dotnet/api/system.span-1) and [default interface methods](/dotnet/csharp/language-reference/proposals/csharp-8.0/default-interface-methods)).

If the above limitations are a concern then this document is intended to provide options on how to transtition from C++/CLI to ISO C++ and/or .NET. The approaches described represent a preference for cross-platform and access to the respective language's entire feature set.

## Expose C++ as C exports

> .NET has supported directly calling C code since .NET Framework 1.0 through the [Platform Invoke](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/pinvoke) (P/Invokes) mechanism. All C++ APIs that are expected to be called from .NET could be wrapped in a C-style function. This approach has always worked with .NET but prior to .NET 7, the recommendation was to use [`DllImportAttribute`](/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.dllimportattribute). Since .NET 7, the [`LibraryImportAttribute`](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/pinvoke-source-generation?source=recommendations) should be prefered in all cases. As it relates to C++/CLI, the `LibraryImportAttribute` mechanism provides a higher performance solution to calling C exports than previously available. Furthermore, the extensibility provided by `LibraryImportAttribute` enables developers to create customized marshalling schemes where they are in full control of how and when data is marshalled across the interop boundary. This is in stark contrast to using `DllImportAttribute` that imposes significant performance penalties if custom marshalling is needed.

Reviewer: > supported since .NET Framework 1.0

I get it, but it is unnecessary to provide this historical context.

```suggestion
.NET supports directly calling C code through the [Platform Invoke](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/pinvoke) (P/Invokes) mechanism. All C++ APIs that are expected to be called from .NET could be wrapped in a C-style function. This approach has always worked with .NET but prior to .NET 7, the recommendation was to use [`DllImportAttribute`](/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.dllimportattribute). Since .NET 7, the [`LibraryImportAttribute`](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/pinvoke-source-generation?source=recommendations) should be prefered in all cases. As it relates to C++/CLI, the `LibraryImportAttribute` mechanism provides a higher performance solution to calling C exports than previously available. Furthermore, the extensibility provided by `LibraryImportAttribute` enables developers to create customized marshalling schemes where they are in full control of how and when data is marshalled across the interop boundary. This is in stark contrast to using `DllImportAttribute` that imposes significant performance penalties if custom marshalling is needed.
```

### Example

Consider the following C++ class declaration and how to consume it via P/Invokes in C#.

```cpp
class myclass
{
public:
    myclass() = default;
    int get_value()
    {
        return -1;
    }
};

// New C exports
extern "C" __declspec(dllexport) myclass* new_myclass()
{
    return new myclass;
}

extern "C" __declspec(dllexport) void delete_myclass(myclass* mc)
{
    delete mc;
}

extern "C" __declspec(dllexport) int call_get_value(myclass* mc)
{
    return mc->get_value();
}
```

Consumption of the `myclass` type can then occur in C# using P/Invokes.

```csharp
void* mc = new_myclass();
Debug.Assert(mc != null);
Console.WriteLine(call_get_value(mc));
delete_myclass(mc);

[LibraryImport("...")]
static unsafe partial void* new_myclass();
[LibraryImport("...")]
static unsafe partial void delete_myclass(void* mc);
[LibraryImport("...")]
static unsafe partial int call_get_value(void* mc);
```

### Concerns

The wrapping of complex or large C++ APIs to C is tedious and error prone. Source generation techniques can be employed to help create wrapped C APIs, but even this may represent significant effort.

## Expose C++ as `IUnknown` based APIs

> Instead of reducing object-oriented concepts down to what can be expressed in C, using [COM interop](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/cominterop) permits keeping some aspects of C++. The .NET platform has a long history of reducing friction when using COM style interfaces. There is existing tools that can help generate COM interface definitions and [cross-platform support](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/tutorial-comwrappers) through the [`ComWrappers`](/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.comwrappers) API for `IUnknown` interop was enabled in .NET 6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of reducing object-oriented concepts down to what can be expressed in C, using [COM interop](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/cominterop) permits keeping some aspects of C++. The .NET platform has a long history of reducing friction when using COM style interfaces. There are tools that can help generate COM interface definitions and [cross-platform support](/dotnet/standard/native-interop/tutorial-comwrappers) through the [`ComWrappers`](/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.comwrappers) API for `IUnknown` interop.
```

Not necessary to mention .NET 6. It is now the oldest version we support.
